---
annotation_id: 908134e4-e57d-425f-b0e9-4ef791a9552d
author: rmadams
tei_target: "#highlight-908134e4-e57d-425f-b0e9-4ef791a9552d"
annotated_page: rdx_vkt3x.p.idm140051246520176
page_index: 25
target: highlight-908134e4-e57d-425f-b0e9-4ef791a9552d
tags:
- lohrmann

---
What is the kingdom of heaven? Quoting Luke 17:20-21, the panel on the left shares Jesus’ words that the kingdom of God does not consist in visible things but rather is within you or among you. Instead of an earthly kingdom and physical riches, Jesus preached and brought a spiritual kingdom, kinship, and treasure. This spiritual life is depicted in the disciples’ sharing of a holy meal the upper left part of the picture. Together they share simple food, with one person pouring the wine and the rest seated together around the table.

The second biblical set of texts further explains the image within the context of Matthew 15, in which Pharisees and scribes challenged Jesus about his disciples’ failure to wash properly before meals. This critique is visualized in the two characters at the bottom right of the scene, one of whom holds a washing basin for the hands of the other. 

Frequently the objects of critique in the New Testament, the Pharisees and scribes were important upholders of Jewish teachings and customs, especially in areas further away from the temple and priests in Jerusalem. They had the interests of their religion and the people at heart. In the New Testament, Jesus’ critique of them is not—as later Christians have often interpreted—a critique of Judaism as a religion of law and ritual but a caution to all believers about attending to the faith of the heart rather than trusting in outward ceremonies or good deeds. 

Aware of the power that human customs and ideals of holiness have over people’s hearts, Jesus’ words in Matthew 15:8-9 challenge people to put God first, as he cited Isaiah 29:13 (not chapter 21, as the text says), “‘This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me; in vain do they worship me, teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.’” Such a passage reinforces the previous verse from Luke 17 about the spiritual, internal nature of the kingdom of God. 