---
annotation_id: c1141a1c-e231-4b40-8bc9-c7a0495683c9
author: rmadams
tei_target: "#highlight-c1141a1c-e231-4b40-8bc9-c7a0495683c9"
annotated_page: rdx_vksgb.p.idm140051181677136
page_index: 7
target: highlight-c1141a1c-e231-4b40-8bc9-c7a0495683c9
tags:
- silver

---
Here Cranach presents a conventional image of the Passion, representing the Crowning with Thorns (John 19: 2) within a claustrophobic, closed space, in which  Jesus is assailed by tormentors, who gesticulate wildly while his own hands are tied.  Their grotesque features indicate their evil natures, a commonplace contrast to the passive suffering of Christ in German Passion iconography.  Here, as elsewhere, such images of the tormentors often use anti-Semitic caricatures to represent Jews expressly as the enemies of Christ.

[^1]

[^1]:([Marrow 1979](#zotero-LSULSRMC)). On negative depictions of Jews, see [Trachtenberg 1983](#zotero-9GVVVQ6V); [Mellinkoff 1993](#zotero-WGFVLUCW); [Schreckenberg 1996](#zotero-R6IVLIT4); [Merback 2007](#zotero-E4K9DPGT). For Luther and the Jews, see [Obermann 1984](#zotero-9RBUKU4D).  On contemporary judicial punishments and representations of the Passion, see [Merback 1998](#zotero-SYGWLJ6E).

---

### Works Cited

* <a name="zotero-LSULSRMC" id="zotero-LSULSRMC"></a>Marrow, James. <i>Passion Iconography in Northern European Art of the Late Middle Ages and Early Renaissance</i>. Kortrijk: Van Ghemmert, 1979.
* <a name="zotero-9GVVVQ6V" id="zotero-9GVVVQ6V"></a>Trachtenberg, Joshua. <i>The Devil and the Jews: The Medieval Conception of the Jew and Its Relation to Modern Anti-Semitism</i>. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1983.
* <a name="zotero-WGFVLUCW" id="zotero-WGFVLUCW"></a>Mellinkoff, Ruth. <i>Outcasts: Signs of Otherness in Northern European Art of the Late Middle Ages</i>. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993.
* <a name="zotero-R6IVLIT4" id="zotero-R6IVLIT4"></a>Schreckenberg, Heinz. <i>The Jews in Christian Art</i>. New York: Continuum, 1996.
* <a name="zotero-E4K9DPGT" id="zotero-E4K9DPGT"></a>Merback, Mitchell, ed. <i>Beyond the Yellow Badge: New Approaches to Anti-Semitism in Medieval and Early Modern Europe</i>. Leiden: Brill, 2007.
* <a name="zotero-9RBUKU4D" id="zotero-9RBUKU4D"></a>Obermann, Heiko. <i>The Roots of Anti-Semitism in the Age of Renaissance and Reformation</i>. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1984.
* <a name="zotero-SYGWLJ6E" id="zotero-SYGWLJ6E"></a>Merback, Mitchell. <i>The Thief, the Cross and the Wheel. Pain and the Spectacle of Punishment in Medieval and Renaissance Europe</i>. Chicago: University Of Chicago Press, 1998.